DOCSP-32214: Add new Add Sync to an App page for Kotlin (#3035)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sdk/kotlin/sync/add-sync-to-app.txt

.. _kotlin-add-sync-to-app:
.. _kotlin-sync:
.. _kotlin-sync-overview:

=============================================
Add Device Sync to an App - Kotlin SDK
=============================================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

This page contains information about Device Sync, its basic concepts, 
and how to add Sync to a client app with the Realm Kotlin SDK. 
Once you have added Sync to your app, you can access a synced realm 

> from the client. Refer to :ref:`<kotlin-open-a-synced-realm>` for 

Author: Removed

more information.

For a detailed explanation of Device Sync, refer to 

> :ref:`realm-sync-get-started` in the Atlas App Services

Author: Moved

documentation.
Already familiar with Device Sync? Skip ahead to the 
:ref:`<kotlin-enable-sync-in-app-services>` section 
to get started.

> .. note:: Flexible Sync Mode 

Author: Removed

   This page describes how to add Device Sync with Flexible Sync Mode. 
   If your App Services backend uses the older Partition-Based Sync, refer to 
   :ref:`kotlin-partition-based-sync`.

   We recommend that you use Flexible Sync.

.. _kotlin-add-sync-to-app-prereqs:

Prerequisites
-------------

You can add Device Sync to an app in several ways, depending on the state 
of your app and your data. This guide describes how to add Sync to an 
existing client app using Development Mode. This guide assumes that your 

> app uses the Realm Kotlin SDK and that you have already defined a data model. 

Author: Good catch. Updated

Because Device Sync connects your client app to the App Services backend 
through an Atlas App Services App, you need to following before you 
can get started: 

#. An Atlas App Services App with authentication enabled. To learn how, refer to :ref:`<create-a-realm-app>` in the App Services documentation.
#. Confirm that your app can connect to the App Services backend. To learn how, refer to :ref:`<kotlin-connect-to-backend>`.

.. _kotlin-example-sync-data-model:

About the Examples on this Page
-------------------------------

The examples on this page refer to an example Kotlin Todo app with an 

> already defined data model that includes a ``List`` object containing 

Author: Updated

a list of ``Item`` objects:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/kotlin/SchemaSync.snippet.sync-to-do-model.kt
   :language: kotlin
   :caption: Example ToDo app data model

.. _kotlin-realm-sync:
.. _kotlin-flexible-sync-fundamentals:

Device Sync
-----------

> **Device Sync** is an Atlas App Services feature that automatically 

Author: Updated

synchronizes data between client applications using a Realm SDK and
an Atlas App Services backend linked to a MongoDB Atlas cluster. 
When a client device is online, Sync uploads and downloads changesets 
asynchronously in a background thread between the device and your 
backend Atlas App.

The data that syncs between your client app and the App 

> Services backend is determined by a user's permissions to eligible data. 

Author: Updated

Eligible data is determined by the following:

- Your Device Sync data model: The objects you want to sync.

> - Your subscription queries: The one or more client-side queries to those objects that specify the eligible data.

Author: Yeah, that's essentially how I originally drafted it but then overcomplicated it, I think. I really hate trying to write about the data model/subscription stuff...

The role-based permissions that you define in App Services control whether 
that eligible data successfully syncs *to* or *from* the backend for an
authorized user.

Data Model 
~~~~~~~~~~

The Device Sync data model defines the object types that you can sync.
It contains a client-side and server-side schema: 

- **Realm schema**: the object model in your client app that defines your 
  data in Kotlin.
- **App Services schema**: the schema in Atlas App Services that defines
  your data in BSON. 

Both schemas must be consistent with each other to sync data. 

You can define the Device Sync data model in a client app first or 
in Atlas first:

- To define your data mode through your client app, you first
  :ref:`define an object model <kotlin-define-object-model>` 
  directly in your client app code. Then, you can use **Development Mode** to 
  generate a matching App Services schema automatically. Development Mode
  is a configuration setting that allows Device Sync 
  to infer and update schemas based on client-side data models when you 

>   sync data from the client. To learn more, refer to :ref:`<development-mode>` 

Author: I think I'm on the fence since it's technically a step in this guide. I tweaked slightly to refer users to that section, which does point out to the Dev Mode App Services page

  in the App Services documentation.

- If you already have data in Atlas and would
  prefer to define your data model through Atlas first, refer to 
  :ref:`<sync-data-in-atlas-with-client>` in the App Services documentation.

Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A **subscription** is a client-side query to objects in your data model. 
App Services only syncs objects that match the query. You can define multiple

> queries in your client app, but you can only query objects in your 

Author: the impetus is trying and failing to explain Flex Sync (why should I have to query for each type? can't i just sync everything by default?). Updated with your suggestion

data model. 

App Services ensures that your client-side queries are consistent with
your App Services schema through **queryable fields**. These are the 
fields from your data model that can be used in a subscription query. You 

> cannot subscribe to a query that contains a non-queryable field.

Author: much better. updated

> cannot subscribe to a query that contains a non-queryable field.

Author: Updated

When Development Mode is enabled, App Services automatically
adds the fields that appear in your client queries as queryable fields.
You can also manually add and remove queryable fields through the 
App Services UI. For more information, refer to :ref:`<queryable-fields>` 
in the App Services documentation.

For our example app, our data model contains an ``Item`` object 
with a ``complete`` field. When Development Mode is enabled and we define a 
subscription to query only incomplete items, then App Services would 

> automatically add ``complete`` as a queryable field when we sync the data.

Author: Updated

User Permissions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

App Services uses **role-based permissions** to control what individual
users can and cannot do with your app's data when they have a network 

> connection: 

Author: Updated

- When a user has read permissions, Atlas automatically syncs eligible 
  data to the client.
- When a user write permissions, Atlas automatically syncs any local changes 

>   to eligible data to the backend.

Author: Nice. Ties in the subscriptions too, which I think I'm utterly failing at doing. Updated to use the upload/download language

documentation.

.. _kotlin-enable-sync-in-app-services:

Enable Device Sync in App Services
----------------------------------

You must first enable Device Sync in your Atlas App Services App before 
you can add Sync to your client app. 

To enable Device Sync in your App, complete the steps outlined in 
:ref:`Configure and Enable Atlas Device Sync <enable-flexible-sync>` 
procedure in the App Services documentation.

During this process, you can choose whether to enable Development 
Mode and you can select a default role for your app users. 
For more information on the available settings, refer to 
:ref:`<sync-settings>` in the App Services 
documentation.

.. tip:: 

   We recommend enabling Development Mode when you first enable 
   Sync, and then disabling it before your app goes to production. 
   For more information, refer to :ref:`<development-mode>` in the 
   App Services documentation.

For our example app, we enable Device Sync with Development Mode, and 
then add the default "User can read and write all data 
default" role. This means that, for an authorized user with a network 
connection, Atlas will sync eligible data from Atlas to the client 

> *and* from the client to write to the backend. 

Author: Tweaked

Add Sync to Your Client App
---------------------------

After you've configured and enabled Sync in Atlas App Services, 
you can add Sync to your client app. 

.. procedure::

   .. step:: Install the Sync Distribution of the Kotlin SDK

      :ref:`Update your dependencies <kotlin-install-android>` to include 
      the Sync distribution of the Realm Kotlin SDK.

   .. step:: Connect to the App Services backend

      Pass your App ID to an ``App`` client to initialize the App. To get 
      your App ID from the App Services UI, refer to 
      :ref:`Find Your App ID <find-your-app-id>` in the 
      App Services documentation.

      For our example app, we pass our App ID to initialize an ``App`` with 
      default configuration values:

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/kotlin/SyncTest.snippet.connect-to-backend.kt
         :language: kotlin

      For more information on accessing and configuring the App client, refer 
      to :ref:`<kotlin-access-the-app-client>`.

   .. step:: Authenticate a User

      Authenticate a user in your client app with a supported 

>       authentication provider that you have enabled. 

Author: Updated

      
      For our example app, we log in a user using anonymous authentication: 

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/kotlin/SyncTest.snippet.authenticate-user.kt
         :language: kotlin

      For more information on authenticating users in your app, refer to
      :ref:`<kotlin-authenticate-users>`.

   .. step:: Define the Sync Configuration 

      Device Sync requires a `SyncConfiguration 
      <{+kotlin-sync-prefix+}io.realm.kotlin.mongodb.sync/-sync-configuration/index.html>`__

>       configuration object to open a synced realm. Note that 

Author: Removed

         or write an object of an object type that isn't in your schema, 
         Realm will return a schema validation error.

   .. step:: Open the Synced Realm

      Use the defined configuration to 
      :ref:`open the synced realm <kotlin-flexible-sync-open-realm>`.
      When the realm is opened successfully, the initial subscription
      query determines which data to sync to the client.
      If Development Mode is enabled, App Services automatically 
      adds any queryable fields based on the query defined in 
      your schema.

      For our example app, we pass our ``config`` object to 
      ``realm.open()`` to open a synced realm, then wait for 
      our subscriptions to sync with the backend:   

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/kotlin/SyncTest.snippet.open-synced-realm.kt
         :language: kotlin
      
      Because we have Development Mode enabled, App Services 
      automatically added the following as queryable fields based on 
      our initial subscription:

      - ``_id`` (always included)
      - ``ownerId``
      - ``complete``

Use the Realm
-------------

> Now that you've open the configured synced realm, you can use it exactly 

Reviewer: Technically, this section in the other SDKs was written before compensating writes were introduced. That differs from a non-synced realm in that it reverts writes that don't match the subscription query/permissions. There are also some caveats about grouping writes when using Sync for improved performance. Do you think this behavior should be discussed in this section? And/or maybe we should reword this a little, or add more details in the "Write Data to a Synced Realm" bullet?

Author: I don't really want to get too into the weeds past getting sync enabled and connected. Let's update slightly for accuracy/nuance, then point to the Write Data to Synced Realm page

.. _kotlin-add-sync-to-app:
.. _kotlin-sync:
.. _kotlin-sync-overview:

=============================================
Add Device Sync to an App - Kotlin SDK
=============================================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

This page contains information about Device Sync, its basic concepts, 
and how to add Sync to a client app with the Realm Kotlin SDK. 
Once you have added Sync to your app, you can access a synced realm 
from the client. 

Already familiar with Device Sync? Skip ahead to the 
:ref:`<kotlin-enable-sync-in-app-services>` section 
to get started.

Device Sync
-----------

**Device Sync** synchronizes data between client devices and Atlas. 
Data is persisted on a device, even when offline. When the device has a 
network connection, Device Sync uploads and downloads
data in the background and manages conflict resolution. 

The data that syncs between your client app and Atlas is determined by 

> a user's permissions to access eligible data. 
> 
> - Data model: your data type information

Reviewer: Hmm. This feels like a non-sequitur now. It's not obvious how data model follows from "user's permissions to access eligible data." Did I say to take out a transition? If so, I was wrong! 😂  What about something like:

```suggestion
a user's permissions to access eligible data. Eligible data is the
intersection of:

- Data model: your data type information
```

Author: That was my miss. Updated

  generate a matching App Services schema automatically. Development Mode
  is a configuration setting that allows Device Sync 
  to infer and update schemas based on client-side data models when you 
  sync data from the client. The :ref:`<kotlin-enable-sync-in-app-services>` 
  section describes how to enable Device Sync with Development Mode in your 
  client app. 

- If you already have data in Atlas and would
  prefer to define your data model through Atlas first, refer to 
  :ref:`<sync-data-in-atlas-with-client>` in the App Services documentation.

Subscriptions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A **subscription** is a client-side query to objects in your data model. 
App Services only syncs objects that match the query. You can define multiple
queries in your client app. You must define at least one query for 
each object type in your data model.

App Services ensures that your client-side queries are consistent with
your App Services schema through **queryable fields**. These are the 
fields from your data model that can be used in a subscription query. You 
cannot define a subscription using a field that isn't in your queryable fields.

> When Development Mode is enabled, App Services automatically

Reviewer: This paragraph is getting a bit long. How do we feel about splitting it starting with:

```suggestion

When Development Mode is enabled, App Services automatically
```

Author: Updated

adds the fields that appear in your client queries as queryable fields.
You can also manually add and remove queryable fields through the 
App Services UI. For more information, refer to :ref:`<queryable-fields>` 
in the App Services documentation.

> For our example app, our data model contains an ``Item`` object 

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if your data model contains an ``Item`` object 
```

Reviewer: I think it's ok to have the Prereqs and About the Examples sections after this, because they're present before you start getting into the code. But I'm wondering if we want to just move this paragraph out of this section entirely. We cover the same information down below in the procedure - in the "Open the Synced Realm" step we talk about how the relevant fields have been added to queryable fields since Dev Mode is enabled.

> with a ``complete`` field. When Development Mode is enabled and we define a 

Author: ```suggestion
with a ``complete`` field and you define a 
```

> subscription to query only incomplete items, App Services 

Author: ```suggestion
subscription to query only incomplete items. If Development Mode is enabled, then App Services 
```

> automatically adds ``complete`` as a queryable field when we sync the data.

Author: ```suggestion
automatically adds ``complete`` as a queryable field when you sync the data.
```

   :language: kotlin
   :caption: Example ToDo app data model

.. _kotlin-realm-sync:
.. _kotlin-flexible-sync-fundamentals:

.. _kotlin-enable-sync-in-app-services:

Enable Device Sync in App Services
----------------------------------

You must first enable Device Sync in your Atlas App Services App before 
you can add Sync to your client app. 

To enable Device Sync in your App, complete the steps outlined in 
:ref:`Configure and Enable Atlas Device Sync <enable-flexible-sync>` 
procedure in the App Services documentation.

During this process, you can choose whether to enable Development 
Mode and you can select a default role for your app users. 
For more information on the available settings, refer to 
:ref:`<sync-settings>` in the App Services 
documentation.

.. tip:: 

   We recommend enabling Development Mode when you first enable 
   Sync, and then disabling it before your app goes to production. 
   For more information, refer to :ref:`<development-mode>` in the 
   App Services documentation.

For our example app, we enable Device Sync with Development Mode, and 
then add the default "User can read and write all data 

> default" role. This means that, for an authorized user with a network 

Reviewer: I like this language a lot!

Should we add a callout here with a link to the Write Data to a Synced Realm page re: compensating writes? i.e. something like:

> To learn more about what happens when an authorized user does _not_ have
> a network connection, refer to :ref:`page-ref`.

I don't necessarily want to get too in the weeds here, as this is an introductory page, but reading this language made me think "what happens if there isn't a network connection?" As offline-first functionality is still a thing we promote, I wonder how important it is to at least mention this here.

Author: Nice! Added

connection, Device Sync downloads eligible data to the client 
*and* Atlas permits writes to the client and then syncs them the backend. 

Add Sync to Your Client App
---------------------------

After you've configured and enabled Sync in Atlas App Services, 
you can add Sync to your client app. 

.. procedure::

   .. step:: Install the Sync Distribution of the Kotlin SDK

      :ref:`Update your dependencies <kotlin-install-android>` to include 
      the Sync distribution of the Realm Kotlin SDK.

   .. step:: Connect to the App Services backend

      Pass your App ID to an ``App`` client to initialize the App. To get 
      your App ID from the App Services UI, refer to 
      :ref:`Find Your App ID <find-your-app-id>` in the 
      App Services documentation.

      For our example app, we pass our App ID to initialize an ``App`` with 
      default configuration values:

      .. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/kotlin/SyncTest.snippet.connect-to-backend.kt
         :language: kotlin

>       For more information on accessing and configuring the App client, refer 

Reviewer: Should we be more explicit about the the information that is available on the linked page to improve discoverability? I.e.:

> For information about the options available when configuring the App client, such
> as setting a debug app name, providing custom request headers, or specifying a dispatcher,
> refer to...

Author: Updated
